- Hello, everyone out there on YouTube.
Thank you for being here.
Thank you for being part of our recording, our live stream.
If you're here live, throw something into the chat.
We'll try to make it part of the show.
Got comments, thoughts for Lucas, that would be great.
If you're watching later, well, thanks for watching.
All right, Lucas, ready to kick this off?
- Sure.
- Lucas, welcome back to Talk Python to Me.
- Well, I'm very happy to be here.
- It's the first time you can see me as well, I guess.
So it's kind of a new thing for me.
So first times, first times.
- Yeah, absolutely.
Well, you've been on the show three times before.
You talked about, let's see,
the very first one was gradual typing
of production applications,
and that was applying TypeHence and mypy over on Instagram,
which was fantastic work,
and I loved what you're doing there.
Then we talked about the Python Language Summit.
you gave us a wrap up on that or a rundown on that
for 2018 and then diving into CPython 3.8 and beyond.
So, here we are again, thanks for being back.
- Yeah, happy to be here.
Like 3.8 is now already an old release, right?
It's already in security only fixes mode.
So yeah, like it was new at the time.
- Yeah, it was, I think when we were talking about it,
it's like, what are the new exciting features?
I guess while we're on that topic, just real quickly,
is what are the new features that you're excited about now,
either 3.9, 3.10, or 3.11?
What's out now?
What's just about out, and what's coming soon?
Yeah, so there's quite many.
The one that I'm living with the most right now
is actually just better error messages.
So this is a trend that is still happening.
so there's further changes for 3.11 later,
which is already like the main branch right now
of development, right?
So 3.10 is already in release candidate mode.
So like we're gonna get the second release candidate
pretty soon and then, you know, the final release.
So all new features now go to 3.11 already.
But the better error messages, like really kind of,
you know, they're kind of this icing on the cake
that make, you know, stuff much nicer for you.
There's a bunch of typing changes
that I was really looking forward to back in PEP 484 times,
like when we first added string,
well, annotations to Python.
I always kind of wanted them to feel more native
inside your code.
And now with Python 3.10, you can use,
I guess it's PEP 604, like union types,
like that kind of are not so verbose.
they use the pipe operator instead of spelling out
capital case union of whatever,
which is kind of more compact
and also more readable through this, right?
Because like now types that aren't super trivial
don't look as scary anymore, right?
'Cause like you kind of don't have to have
the square brackets so much and whatnot.
- Yeah.
people who haven't explored this deeply,
there previously was basically a parallel,
a mirrored hierarchy of types
that weren't actually the types, but they described the type.
So from typing import capital L list,
that would say you're returning a lowercase L list
as your type.
And then it got even more interesting
when you have like optional, right?
I have an optional user that's returned from this query.
And now you can just do things like user pipe none
and things like that.
- Yeah, absolutely.
So this was fun, but also like what I really kind of
like to use is that like the lowercase types
just feel more natural, right?
So, you know, kind of just putting dicts and lists
and whatever, like just straight out of built-ins
and just applying generics to them just kind of looks right.
Like feels right.
- Yeah, it always felt weird.
Like, why do I have to do an import just to talk
about this thing I'm already using, right?
- Yeah, because if you actually look at how the feature
was enabled to allow lowercase list of string and whatnot,
this is now part of the interpreter.
This was kind of changed deeply in the C code
of the interpreter back in 2014,
when we first released PEP 484.
The value of typing wasn't really so clear cut yet.
It was a new idea.
We wanted to have this out,
we wanted to have people actually test it and say, you know, is this something that Python
could actually see value in? So it was a little too early to make, you know, drastic changes to
the interpreter just because it would be handy to have for typing. Like, it's kind of, you know,
icky in the sense that between here and there, we clearly have this transition period where
typing just becomes more natural to use and more ergonomic.
And obviously, the tooling like mypy matures,
but it's what you have to do if you are dealing with a language that is 30 years old.
Right. So we didn't have this clean room experience because the language was already successful.
It was already out there.
So, yeah, like a bunch of new languages now have this comfort, like have this luxury of just being able to just,
you know, can look at an empty page
and just design from scratch.
Like we have--
- Yeah, the one that comes--
Yeah, yeah, for sure.
I mean, Python is 30 years old, right?
The language that gives me sort of,
that comes to mind when you say that is Swift, right?
Swift took a bunch of these ideas,
like you have to explicitly say,
here's a nullable reference type and whatnot.
But like all of that stuff was done looking back at,
you know, Python, at C#, at C++,
at all these languages that, you know,
and then sort of put together the pieces, right?
- Yeah, absolutely.
Like Swift in particular, I kind of like,
you know, kind of, it fits my brain.
Like I talk with Corey Benfield every now and again about it
like he's now working on it actually at Apple.
So yeah, I do feel it's a good evolution of Objective-C
since, you know, kind of, it's where it all kind of
started from. - Yeah, it's definitely
an improvement.
I don't want to go too far down the rat hole,
but I do wish it had something like
a better standard library like Python has.
I feel like the language is good,
but then when I want to do stuff,
I'm like, "Oh, there's so much missing
"from the foundation of it in terms of the functionality."
Anyway, long story short,
'cause it still depends on the whole Objective-C
sort of really funky class library stuff.
- Oh, yeah.
- Yeah, I'm sure I'll get mail about that.
(both laughing)
All right, so sorry, I super derailed you.
What else is exciting that's coming in the near term?
- Well, of course, like the biggest kind of feature
that was most controversial probably
is the match statement, right?
So pattern matching in Python.
It is a huge feature.
It kind of changes how some of the code
that you're dealing with looks.
And also it kind of introduces for the first time
this concept of context specific keywords, right?
Like that's something that maybe not so many
what's new in Python 3.10 posts kind of touch on,
but just notice that you can still use match
and case as regular variable names.
You can still name your functions that,
you can still use this as argument names
and whatnot and whatnot.
But when the Python grammar discovers,
when the parser sees that, oh, this is in a place
where it fits a construct that looks like a match statement,
it'll deal with that and it'll parse that successfully.
That is what we could do having
this new peg parser that it started in Python 3.9,
like it was released then already,
but without any new features.
Like now in Python 3.10,
we're getting the match statement.
I'm still, to be honest with you,
before this area where I can tell you that I have
A lot of experience writing match statements is super useful for me and whatnot.
I've written a few of them where it actually made sense and made the code, well, I couldn't
really say shorter because usually it actually doesn't, but much more readable because it's
kind of flatter, it's easier to parse, visually, I mean, by person.
But it's not something that I really use daily.
somebody is really worried about like, "Hey, what is Python becoming? It's such a complex
feature. What about the kids? Think of the children." I always tell them like, "Hey,
how many descriptors did you implement in your last week or month?"
True. How many meta classes have you worked with? That's a good point.
It's almost like another feature like this where sometimes it will make perfect sense,
But most often, just like with assignment expressions,
most often, you won't see them.
You won't be using those.
>>Yeah.
OK, well, fantastic.
You know, you're talking about the foundational stuff,
like the PEG parser.
That's not a feature that a bunch of people are saying,
I can't wait for a better parser.
But it's one of these enabling things.
And I feel like this whole role that you're in
is sort of in that same idea, right?
The same vein that it might not be super public
or generate a bunch of new features,
but it might be making things a lot smoother for everyone
who wants to come along and do those things.
What do you think?
>>Victor: Yeah, well, the way I look at it
is that there's a lot of us on the core team.
and even more people around the core team who are kind of,
well, we call them drive-by contributors, right?
Like, you know, they would find an issue,
just, you know, produce a bunch of pull requests
and maybe then kind of disappear.
Or maybe they're around, but like not producing more for us.
And we are obviously very happy with any contribution.
And the sad reality is that like,
we have more of those than we can realistically review.
So the problem isn't even that, you know,
you need more people to actually be able to actually produce value.
We need people to evaluate the value that we're already getting from the community and
from each other to be able to actually merge them into mainline and to see how the language
evolves.
Obviously, every year, this changes over the years how Python is developed.
We've going to have a bunch of people who are super invested and they're going to be
spending crazy amounts of time, including on weekends and whatnot, to work on Python,
even for free. I know, I did that for a decade. So those contributions are super valued, but usually
those really don't... Well, those people change, right? You cannot really do this
in a consistent manner, day in, day out for a long period of time. Your life situation changes,
your job changes or whatnot and you know like you stop contributing and what happens to Python then
well we lose some value. Currently we have over 1400 open pull requests and I've been on a mission
to kind of bring that number down. Currently as I'm looking at it it's 1421. Yeah I just I was
looking at this morning here I put it up on the screen for people watching live and wow wow wow
That is a lot of information coming in,
and not just the sheer number of open ones,
but the thing that struck me is I'm reading down
and 26 minutes ago, an hour ago, two hours ago,
three hours ago, three hours ago, four hours ago, five hours.
Like, that's hard to keep up no matter what, right?
- Yeah, so like some of those are already reviewed,
like the faster implementation of gzip decompress
that you have like somewhere on the screen,
like a little lower than the first one. Yeah, yes, like this on lowest one at the moment.
So the thing is like there's so many of those that, you know, kind of somebody actually has
to come in and, you know, day in day out, like butts in seats, just review the value that people
are already providing for you. Like this particular change actually extracted from an older rejected
change is actually providing clear value, right?
Like now we're going to have gzip compress and decompress be faster, right?
But it is actually not a change that is obvious, right?
Like you have eight files that are changed.
You really need to see that, oh, there's a lot of code that changed.
Some of it actually wasn't.
It was just moved so that we could reuse it better.
Some of it actually has subtle changes.
So this isn't something that many volunteers
will be willing to do on their free time
because it's mostly kind of, well, it's work.
It really is work.
- It's the janitorial type of just keep it clean,
keep it going.
Yeah, the maintenance. - Exactly.
- Yeah, exactly.
So let's go ahead and actually introduce this main topic
here, the big announcement for you.
On your blog here, you have,
"I am the new CPython developer in residence."
Congratulations.
- Ah, thank you.
I'm still very excited about this.
Like, you know, back when we only had volunteers doing this
and maybe, well, Guido being, you know,
kind of tolerated as the BDFL at Dropbox,
because obviously he was being paid
to actually move my Pi forward, right?
Like that was his team,
but obviously he did a lot for Python as well.
And that was kind of understood by Dropbox that it's fine.
And many of us were in the same situation.
I was tolerated as a CPython core developer at Facebook
and some others were at their own respective companies.
So I was super frustrated by this because
there's this tremendous value that we're giving to the entire community,
including multi-billion dollar corporations.
And we only thought like, hey, the expectations are high
and we want to provide the best tooling that we can for the industry.
but it is kind of a hard sell, you know,
when your kid wants to go out and, you know,
and you're like, oh no, I'm fixing this bug,
but at the same time you're doing this for free.
So you're thinking, you know, like,
where did I go wrong in life?
Like, you know, my values are somewhere, you know,
not where they supposed to be.
So Red Hat actually hired Victor Stinner,
like full time to work on Python,
but it was still Red Hat.
He's still an employee of a company that is for profit.
So now the CPython developer in residence is different.
It is sponsored by a PSF sponsor,
in this particular case by Google.
Like Google as a company reached out to the PSF
specifically to sponsor stuff like this.
And that is amazing.
Like I am very happy that they did
because I really believe that this is something
that might kind of alter how we think about maintenance
of a community driven projects like Python.
- Yeah, and thank you to Google for doing this.
so easy for them to say, well, maybe we could just hire
some core developers and they could work on speeding up
Google Cloud stuff for Python
and we'll let them also contribute back, right?
That would be the sort of natural historical way
of doing something like that.
- Yes.
- But here it's like, no, let's actually directly
sort of effectively hire a person,
but put them in an independent role
that just makes Python better.
And I think that's interesting, right?
- Yeah, like the amazing thing about this
is that while I do hope that some of the work
that I already did was useful for Google as well,
like there is no job description written by them
and they're...
Right, like it's really independent in this sense
and this is what makes it super healthy
and kind of, I think, well, sustainable for the future,
that it is actually me being able to talk
to the steering council, which I do regularly,
and to the PSF about, hey, what do we actually need?
And we don't have to take into consideration
kind of direct value for our sponsors.
We are providing indirect value,
but we don't have a roadmap where there are certain
milestones that we need to reach.
Like, it's not like that.
So I'm very happy about this difference
because we did have sponsors before,
like that did have either projects
that they really wanted to move forward, right?
You know, and we still have those,
like so for example, packaging and whatnot,
or events that happened, right?
So Facebook sponsored, you know, core development sprints.
So we had those at the campus two years in a row,
and then Microsoft took over,
then we had Bloomberg, and then we had COVID.
You know, so like those things do happen and I'm very happy for those, but this is a kind of a game changer.
Like we have not done this way of sponsoring a project before, where we're actually thinking about the software world in Python Software Foundation, where we directly sponsor work on the code, on the source code.
Yeah. The PSF has what, seven, eight, nine full-time employees, but you're the first
employee who is in a sort of software developer role. I think the closest we had before was a
project management role for the new PIP. Is that right?
Yeah. So like we have that, like there's also E who works on our infrastructure, right? So what
What is also important for Python, and this is dealt with by the PSF, is to keep the website
running and to keep PyPI running, and so on.
So obviously all of this requires constant supervision, and it's also something that
you can spend your life working full-time on, and this is what E is doing.
However, that wasn't contributing to see Python as a repository directly, and this is the
entire change here. Yeah that's fantastic. Quick shout out to just the two other
visionary sponsors we got Bloomberg and Microsoft through Azure. That's I think
that's awesome. I think this whole visionary sponsor Google was the first
one in that category right? Yes that is that is a change in how the PSF was
looking at sponsorship before like I'm very happy to see that. Like this entire
you know developer in residence position was something that I was pretty stressed
by when I first got to know that, oh, this is actually going to be happening, because
I do believe that my particular performance will make or break future ideas on whether
this should be extended to more people or just closed down altogether.
So it's not only providing value to the project, it's literally providing proof that this development
model works.
So yeah, there's certain responsibility around it.
I think I already caught a rhythm that I can sustain
and I think, you know, kind of splits my own coding
with actually reviewing and accepting other contributions,
which are the bulk of what I'm doing.
Because like, you know, otherwise,
if I just focused on coding all week,
I might maybe, if I'm lucky and other people review my work,
make maybe five, maybe six changes to CPython.
we're doing careful reviews because like even simple changes might have actual far-reaching
consequences. But when I'm reviewing other changes, we sometimes have like 50 or over 50 changes that
I can actually merge into mainline. So I'm very happy about that. That is obviously a much better
deal for everybody. - Yeah, it's one of these enabling roles, not just sort of heads down
on coding roles, which I think is the important thing.
- Absolutely.
- Paul Everett out there in the live stream says,
you mentioned the stress from the responsibility,
agreed, it takes some bravery to do it, kudos.
- Oh, thank you.
Yeah, like at the same time,
I was literally giving talks before about,
yeah, we should do this.
So, I kind of put myself out there
even before this was a position.
So at least applying,
because like obviously it wasn't at all obvious to anybody,
like who is going to be chosen for this.
I have this applying was sort of in the cards.
Like I had to man up and do it, you know.
- Yeah, that's cool.
Well, you know, let's start with,
let's sort of explore a bit your background.
Like it's not just that you are a user of Python.
I don't know, even a really good Python developer
themselves might not be a good fit for this role
because it really is like closely working
with people contributing to the code base
and the core developers and all that.
So, you know, maybe give people a sense
of some of the things that you did previously to this
in the, it's like, for example, you create a black.
I think maybe people have heard of black.
- Yeah, if anything, this was actually probably
something that made it harder for me to get this position
because obviously everybody is scared, like,
hey, are you gonna reformat all of this
down the library now, like, you know.
- Well, you're bringing the black guy.
He's gonna totally format it different.
- Yeah.
- The biggest PR ever.
- No, like, so, joking aside,
I'm not new in the project,
and that was obviously important.
It's kind of hard for me to, you know,
kind of now enumerate the reasons why I was chosen.
Like, you know, kind of,
I can only tell you what I told the PSF when I applied,
because that was actually like the only time in my life where I actually had to write like a proper
cover letter and actually kind of do some soul searching and say like, "Hey, am I actually
a good fit for this?" And I think of that. - What is my mission statement?
- Exactly. Yeah, pretty much. So I've been around for a while. I've done some changes big and small.
There's a bunch of peps with my name on them.
So I guess it's not just tiny typo fixes and introducing new bugs.
It's also introducing peps.
Some of them might be more clear-cut wins than others.
But yeah.
>> You appear in a lot of the peps.
You were the release manager as well, right?
>> Yes, I still am for 3.9.
3.9 is now currently already pretty late in the game in the sense that
we will be releasing Python 3.9.7 just next Monday. So probably not when, you know,
the listeners of the podcast are going to, well, like, they're probably going to see this already
released. But that for now, like for the ones like watching the live stream, yeah, next Monday is when
we're going to release 3.9.7. So that's already the seventh bug fix release of Python 3.9. There's
There's gonna be a bunch of more of those
and then it's going to graduate or retire
into the mode where only security fixes
are considered for inclusion.
This is where Python 3.8 is already.
I've been managing the releases of that.
The coolest features now--
- Sorry, how long do you remain the release manager
until 3.9 is retired or does it get handed off
at some point?
No, no, no.
You become a release manager for the entirety of a lifecycle
of two releases.
This was true for a long time.
I didn't dig up prehistory, but since the Python 3 releases,
I looked at that was the case.
Python 2.7, I think, was Benjamin.
And 2.6, I'm not sure that it was him.
It was probably Barry Warsaw.
But the thing is, 2.7 was the longest release managing job ever.
So you could just burn yourself out on that one release.
So that's fine.
For us currently, we're managing two releases.
So how long is that?
Well, with the development of a given Python version, where 3.11 is already being developed
right now, it takes around a year and a half for it to actually get out there as the final
release.
We do have a cadence where we release new versions every year, but that's only because
once one release becomes beta, we can already switch the branches and now new features go
to a yet new version.
So currently-
I think that happened on your watch, right?
happened on your watch, wasn't it 18 months before?
Yes.
So 18 months of a cadence was never really a hard calendar
event.
It was more like a guideline.
We're like, yeah, we're going for 18 months.
Sometimes it was 19, sometimes it was 20.
But it was problematic for many reasons.
So yes, one of the peps that I authored
was a PEP saying, hey, we should change
the cadence of development to make it an annual release
cadence which helps with downstream distributors like Linux distributions.
And for many other reasons like you know for us like that's in the pep.
But yeah like to just close on your original question like it takes around
eight years from starting the job to like actually saying oh now I'm a
retired release manager.
So it's a big commitment isn't it?
Yeah wow that's amazing.
Well thank you for that.
That's that's wild.
So when you, you touched on this a little bit,
but on your original blog post announcing it,
which I'll link to in the show notes, of course,
you talked about what can one person do
as the developer in residence?
And you called out a bunch of specific things here
about how you can basically be a multiplier effect
for people who want to contribute,
who are not core developers.
Do you want to maybe sort of give us the rundown on those things?
Sure.
So, like, the blog post, I'm still happy with it because it kind of shows that it wasn't
just winging it, like I actually thought it through.
But like, you know, it lists a bunch of things that are ideas and then you actually start
doing the job and some things become clear, right?
So like, all of the things I wrote are true.
But what I, for example, didn't quite like word out in the blog post that I realized
is important is that very many changes that I touch are kind of 90% there, where I cannot
just merge them as is, but really what I need changing is the doc string is just bad or
the comment is misleading or whatever.
So like a bunch of simple things that kind of, it feels just wrong to just review the
the change and say, hey, like I request you do this, you know,
- This trivial little thing, right?
- Because you need to break.
- Yeah, you got to do the line break
because this code is 90 lines and 90 characters long.
Like you could just break that line
and then commit it, right?
- Yeah, so this is what I do actually very often right now.
I just kind of take the change locally, you know,
run the tests that, you know, kind of are important
for this particular case.
I do the change that I would ask for just myself, you know,
without actually looping in the original author. Most people actually leave that tick on their
GitHub pull requests making my job easier. So yeah, thanks for that. And then, yeah, maybe-
I just did a PR last night and I allow maintainer to edit the PR, yes.
Yes. This is something I'm using very often right now. Because if you forgot to, for example, put
a news entry for this and you've never done this before, yes, there's a bot for this that Marietta
I wrote so like you know you just need to go and read how to do this and you will be
able to do this from now on but you know when will you do that maybe tomorrow maybe in a
week maybe you're just gonna leave this pull request you know to go stale so instead I
just go and do this for you so this kind of level of multiplication really I think is
kind of you know closing the gap like because very many changes and sometimes it's just
sad to look at, you know, like you have a change from 2017 that is clearly great,
you know, like clearly valuable.
And then there was some knit that, you know, prevented it from being merged and
now it's 2021 and it no longer merges because there's conflicts with other
unrelated things.
It's so out of date.
It's no longer just a knit.
It's now like a big project.
Now it's hard to merge.
Uh, and obviously not just that, maybe that original person who created the
change and worked hard on it now is discouraged or moved on to other projects because you know
like it wasn't merged for four years so this is what we want to change right we want to make the
well not just the first-time contributor but like any contributor well life or experience like much
better by at least providing feedback like not all feedback will be positive like this is already a
a mature project and sometimes very good and easy ideas actually aren't if you look close
enough.
You know, like this is the frustrating part where even kind of clear-cut advantages might
be disadvantages for a different group of users, right?
Or on a different platform that you're not a user of, but you know, we have to actually
look at the big picture.
But at least you're going to know from somebody like me that, hey, like this is good, but
We cannot take it because of the X, Y, Z.
- It's super frustrating or disappointing
to put work into doing a PR, submitting the PR,
and then it's not that it was rejected.
It just gets, it gets no response.
And that, you know, that's, I think, really frustrating.
Like I spent a whole day 'cause I was thinking
this would make this thing, almost works for me,
make it perfect for me, and here's the thing.
And the answer could be, no, it's not the right direction,
but no answer at all is just like,
"Ah, I'm not sure I want to do this again."
Related to that, Rodrigo out in the live stream
has a pretty good question, I think.
Let me throw that out to you.
What is some of the advice
to potential future Drive by contributors?
How could they make your life easier?
- Well, in the future, we'll move to GitHub issues.
So a bunch of this will become easier
for the contributors themselves.
But currently that we still have a bugspython.org,
there is a required step pretty much
for anything that isn't a trivial typo,
which is you need to have a bugspython.org account
where we know that you signed the CLA, right?
So the contributor license agreement saying,
I release my code under Apache, for example, right?
So that we can actually use it and merge it and it's fine.
So this is something that, you know,
kind of is the important original step.
And once you're already on bugspython.org
and your change is not trivial,
please click that open new issue button
and write what you're doing and why.
Maybe it's already there, maybe you already know
that you're fixing a particular thing
that was already reported by somebody else.
But if not, spend this five to 10 minutes
describing what is happening
and why you want the change applied.
very many changes, simply do the thing that they want to do.
Many of them don't even write in the pull request name
like what they're doing.
It's simply the original GitHub update file,
which really is a puzzle now for anybody else
because we don't really know why this thing was touched
in the first place.
So essentially just describe like where you're coming from,
like what is this change doing?
Like that is already great.
that already gives context to us.
And in terms of--
- Would you suggest, sorry,
would you suggest that people create an issue
and get a little bit of buy-in from you all
before actually doing the change and the PR?
Like, would it make sense to say,
I'm considering this, I'm happy to do a PR,
here's the plan.
Would you accept this if I did it?
Okay.
- Because like that is the worst, you know,
centrist bleak answer that anybody can give depends, right?
But it depends.
So when you're doing bug fixes,
you should just go ahead and do your best
and make the bug fix.
Like, here's the failing test, here's the fix.
Yeah, but if you are saying, hey,
this library should have this new function
that I am using in my own project.
So I just wanna put it in, say, func tools or whatever.
So before actually going ahead
and creating that pull request,
Like it probably might sense to discuss it with us
because a growing standard library,
well, isn't so clear cut a value as you think, right?
Because it's a maintenance burden.
And more importantly, you know,
now it has to consider all the usage groups
that the original author might not care about,
but we have to, we necessarily have to.
So yeah, for features, definitely file an issue,
you know, describe your problem.
You might actually, if that makes it easier
for everybody to discuss, just submit a pull request
saying, "Hey, this is the feature
"if you wanna talk about it."
So we actually talk about something concrete
instead of an idea.
But if you, for example, say that,
"Hey, we need to rewrite multiprocessing
"so it does this other thing,"
instead of creating a multi-file gigantic pull request,
let's discuss first.
- Okay, yeah, it makes sense.
Another question out there I think is good from Paul is,
your PR review velocity, do you expect it to go up
as you get better and maybe automate
or go down as you hit the harder PRs?
- Hard to say.
- It's like clearing out your inbox a little bit, right?
Like some of them are easy, some of them are like,
oh, that's a whole day, oh no.
- So it is essentially kind of, it is not very easy
to kind of foresee what's gonna happen a given week,
but one thing for now has been constant.
like, I need to get the number of pull requests down,
like below the number that we have right now,
because there's going to be some that are on page 35
of the open pull requests page.
So I will probably never get to them otherwise.
So I need to bring the number down.
And so far, just by myself, I was unable to do it.
Like, just I cannot do it.
Like I said, like, hey, just 40 hour work week be done.
like I need to see if I can really bring this number down,
you know, and I almost merged 100, you know,
so that was not something I can do every week.
And I still didn't meet the, you know, the goal
because I did leave the count below 1400
when I went to sleep and I, you know,
woke up the next day and it was already over, you know.
- Yeah, we saw the rate of incoming ones, that's a lot.
Yes, so I'm doing around 50-ish a week right now.
And it sounds super high, but some of them
are backboards to branches that we maintain.
I list those because some of those backboards
aren't trivial, right?
They will conflict because the file's changed in between.
Or they require some push from a person
because the bot didn't do what it's supposed to do.
So it's also work.
But 50 isn't really me kind of flexing.
I can do so many changes.
It's really the rate of change that you can see.
So there are enough new changes, right?
That I guess I can always forever just stay on page one and just deal with those.
But that would feel unfair, right?
That is some reversal of priorities where the last step comes in.
You almost need to go to the last page and work your way forward.
So sometimes I would look at the older ones, basically just asking interesting query to
the search, pull request search on GitHub and see what's there for, for example, this
file or what's already approved and that I can kind of maybe push over the line and so
on.
So there's going to be some balance there.
I don't expect to go any faster than I currently am because I can't really automate much there.
There might be some instances where if we analyze the pull requests better, we find
that, oh, there's an entire genre of pull requests that we can just bulk close.
But I can't really, you know, put this on the report.
It's like, oh, I closed 1500 pull requests.
I'm so great.
No, I mean, the ones that I put on the weekly report are all that I, with my own eyes, look
at and review.
So I don't see how automation can really help me do that faster.
We need to be careful, right?
It's still a language used for some important stuff in our industry and beyond.
So a high rate of change sounds nice, but it also is risky if you don't do it responsibly.
So I think that the 50-ish number that I'm currently at is enough that I don't feel like
I could be doing more.
No, it's around what I can reasonably, with a clear mind, review day in, day out.
And I still have some time to actually code, which is also fun because now you're contributing
something of your own.
But yeah, I don't think I can get to 100 every week, regardless of the automation I can come
up with. Yeah, and maybe they get harder. Oh yeah, they might. Because you could go,
"All right, this one I can quickly close this, I can quickly close this," but as you sort of cycle,
iterate over that list, like you get stuck more with the hard ones, potentially. Yeah, so you
mentioned the weekly report. You're doing a weekly report that's just out in public. So for example,
I'll link in the show notes to your weekly report for July 26 to August 1st. What is this,
like your second or third week, something like that?
- Yeah.
Joey, if people want to keep up with what you're doing,
it's right out there, isn't it?
- It would be out there anyway, right?
Because like, even if you don't look at the reports
that I'm writing, like you can still go to my profile
on GitHub and just see like what the stream says there.
And if it doesn't say anything, like, you know,
that's kind of worrying.
It's like, hey, is this guy even working?
What is he doing?
(laughing)
Sometimes, you know--
- Check your Instagram, see if you're on the beach.
- Yeah, exactly.
And I was actually, just last week.
Yes, so the weekly reports are kind of,
you know, thought of, you know, by me personally,
since like the PSF wants me to blog about what I'm doing,
but not at this cadence, right?
But I personally just want to kind of tell you
what I'm working on, because ultimately what I'm doing
is work on an open source project for the community,
like literally hired by the Python Social Foundation.
So there is no agenda that is personal to me
or driven by some corporation.
Like I'm literally maintaining this for you.
So like, why not just let you in
on what I've spent my time on?
Most of those I expect are gonna be pretty boring
after a while, 'cause like a big part of it,
like at the bottom is always just a list of PR
so we can actually click through and see like,
oh, what did I do there?
But I always try to keep it interesting
by finding some highlights
that I found particularly interesting on a given week.
- Yeah.
I think this is really valuable.
And it'll help people a lot
to sort of see what the role is doing.
So originally this role was based
on Django's fellowship program, right?
- Oh, yes.
- Yeah, that's really cool.
you're able to, Django had this idea of bringing on people
to help sort of deal with the lower, not lower level,
the more maintenance oriented stuff, right?
Like exactly what we've been talking about.
And I know one of the things you talked about somewhere
in one of your articles, I can't remember which,
was basically you're very excited about this role,
but you're also a little nervous
'cause you wanna make sure that
you're the first one doing it
and you wanna make sure that it is going strong
for the next year and the year after
and whoever comes along, you want,
this is a good thing and you want to keep going, right?
So that's a little bit,
you're kind of breaking the ground there, right?
- Yes, so this is important for many reasons, obviously,
right, because like, you know,
we can go ahead and talk about like
how this can transform Python
if there's enough people doing this full time and whatnot.
And this is all true, but you know,
there are also kind of more like down to earth reasons
why I would like more people to be able to experience work as I am right now,
because it's just a wonderful way to work.
Not only am I working on something that was my hobby for like a decade now,
so I can just day in day out just kind of, you know,
I feel like I'm just, you know, kind of just doing the hobby right now.
So it's amazing.
But also, and this is something that, you know, like kudos to Google,
Like the sponsorship level for this is Bay Area level of salary for a software developer.
So like it doesn't really matter that I am here in Poland, you know, kind of where, you
know, very many companies would apply some, you know, location specific salaries to a
position and no, like this is literally kind of the, like, well, like I don't want to say
premium grade, but like industry strong salary here.
It's not like you had to go and say, I'm really going to take a hit, but I really want to do this.
So let's just do it.
Right.
So it's a proper job.
Not at all.
Which is exactly why I think, you know, it's both important to the project, but also important to
all those people who are already contributing, they already providing value.
And now if they got paid, like, you know, actual industry strong rates for their work, like this
this has the opportunity or this has this, well,
enough value that it can change a person's life, right?
Like some of our contributors are not in the US
or in countries that are like, I don't know,
Eastern Europe or East Asia or wherever else.
And there, this kind of amount of money
might actually make or break somebody's entire livelihood.
So it's amazing that this opportunity exists.
At the same time, for now, let's not get ahead of ourselves.
This is a contract for one person for 12 months.
It might not get renewed.
We might not get a sponsorship for next year.
So the PSF might actually have to be on the lookout
for more sponsors later, or maybe for a new developer
if they just don't feel like the current one is doing the job well enough.
So all those things might still be in motion.
So I myself don't really already put this in the bank.
I won't be doing this now for however long.
Now I'm really spending this first year of really producing the most I reasonably can.
because it might just be a 12 month gig
that I will be having like fond memories of,
you know, in a decade,
or maybe it's a start of something much bigger.
So why not take the chance and just, you know,
try your best?
- Yeah, absolutely.
So let's dream just a little bit,
and then maybe I'll put a call out to it.
Would it make sense?
Would you want, could you do more with like a team of people
if there were five developers in residence,
what would the PR look like?
20 open ones, the oldest one a month open,
things like that, like, would that be good?
Would you wanna see that?
- Having five people available for work like this
would entirely change how I'm approaching this
because currently, like, I don't really have much
in terms of coordination with others, right?
I just look at whatever current work is happening and try to help out there.
But if you had five people, you could actually hit this problem head on.
We have 1,400 open pull requests.
It's not a question now, if we get them down to zero, but when?
Now we actually can plan to do this methodically.
And a lot of bigger style things that we always wanted to have in Python, we could now just
plan to implement ourselves.
Now if I'm just the only person doing this, it feels irresponsible to just hide somewhere
in a basement in Poland and start churning out my favorite feature.
That's not what this world is about.
But if you have five people, you can reasonably expect that some of them might actually work
full time providing new features or finishing unfinished ones, which there are plenty of
for inclusion in a future version of Python.
of Python.
In fact, I'm already--
- Right, there could be somebody who says,
I'm the one who just goes to all the bug PRs
and just checks those,
and there could be somebody working on performance,
and you could specialize in things like that even.
- Oh, specialize, but I really kind of think
that if all of them are developers in residence,
it would be great if they kind of had
this on-call rotation for doing things as I'm doing now.
So just responding to the external community, right?
because the important thing that I wrote in the original post
and I still believe in is the drive-by contributor
experience is extremely important.
So we would always have to have somebody doing this.
But at the same time, nobody really wants to do only that.
Everybody has to provide--
well, wants to provide value of their own
so that they can touch it and say, yeah, I did this.
This is good.
So yeah, I already have a bit of this,
not as ClearCut, not sponsored by the PSF directly, but Pablo, the release manager of Python 3.10 and
3.11 is both sponsored by Bloomberg to work half-time on Python performance and also by him
doing the release managing job for Python 3.10 and 3.11, he coordinates with me very often right now,
especially that now we are in the release candidate stage of Python 3.10.0.
And the greatest thing about this is that he's in London, right? So yeah, maybe far if I were to
walk to him, but in terms of time zones, that's amazing. Like he's just one hour away. So we mostly
have very synchronized workdays. So I would talk to him like essentially every day. And that is
also something that I missed doing remote work before. Because if you are working for a company
that is in the Bay Area and you're the only one in your time zone, it kind of gets lonely.
Having more people around that now I have, like Pablo, I have Victor, there's Sergi, Storchaka.
And most of our communication is async. So it's not like everybody's talking when I'm not around.
everything is happening on the mailing list anyway.
So it feels like I'm much more integrated into the team
compared to my previous stints at doing remote work.
So I enjoy this a lot.
So it sounds like it would make a big effect.
That's fantastic.
You know, and we look at that list of the sponsors,
the visionary sponsors,
and there's three companies doing really good stuff,
But you gave a implicit sort of call out to this,
and I've said it plenty of times.
There are many companies out there
who their entire core of their business
is built upon Python, and they make billions of dollars.
Shouldn't they contribute a little,
consider contributing something to build that foundation
a little bit stronger, right?
Like maybe make Python a little faster,
or their developers go a little more efficient or whatever.
Yes, so like the good thing about this is that, you know, we always can get, you know, can use more money.
So obviously we need more sponsors.
Many of the companies are trying.
Simply the thing that they need is, you know, some sort of, well, like plan or, well, not like a legal contract, but at least some sort of understanding what the money is going to go for.
What do they get out of it, right?
because in their balance sheets, they have expenses
and they have revenue.
They don't usually have charity, right?
It's tricky for them to make it fit.
- So I think it's kind of, you know,
now with the developer in residence position,
this kind of changes the game
because you're no longer just sponsoring
the Python Software Foundation and kind of, you know,
yeah, you might have expectations,
but maybe that will go for PyCon,
maybe that'll go for sponsoring of events
or minority groups or whatever else.
If your company really is interested in providing
support to the core development, now you can.
And I think, well, hopefully, that is my hope,
we're gonna see more sponsors of that kind of work.
- Yeah, absolutely.
People who are actually interested
can go to python.org/sponsor/application.
And it shows you what the tiers are,
what they cost, what you get.
You get a lot of inside access and a lot of visibility
into Python at the visionary level
that otherwise you wouldn't get.
So there's something to be said for that.
People should check that out, right?
You get to meet with the PSF board.
Yeah, a lot of cool stuff there.
Workshops, job fairs.
I think there's a lot of things on here that could go down
as this is a legit value.
get a meet with the Python steering council, the sprint
recognition, and so on.
So I just want to encourage companies out there.
We don't need tons of them.
If we had four others, you said that would
make a huge difference, right?
Absolutely.
And also, let's be clear.
If a sponsor of a developer in the residence job
came in with a laundry list of this is the things
that I want you to do, we'd probably
have to come to an understanding that this is not
what this is about.
But if people who happen to be employees of a company
come in with changes that make sense
and actually provide value for us,
and now we have people to do full-time code review
and inclusion of those changes, it's
more likely that things that you care about
are going to be included.
So it's, you know, kind of, you can be ethical and impartial to, you know, kind of, well,
forces of, you know, money flowing into your account, like, and also provide value to the
sponsor, right?
Like it's not a zero-sum game, like, you know, so like, let that be clear and explicitly
said because, you know, kind of, I feel like this is also important to know that if, for
For example, there is a company that really, really focuses on an operating system like
Adafruit running everything on Windows or macOS, right?
Like, you know, and now they're like, "Hey, like we really need somebody to make async
IO work better on Windows or we need to fix this fork problem on macOS once and for all
or whatnot."
Like, you know, if they provide, you know, some changes and now there's people to do
the review, more likely than not, we're going to have better support for Windows and Mac
Like, you know, everybody wins.
- Yeah, absolutely.
Another benefit I'll throw out there,
just thinking about this is a lot of companies
have like continuing education programs and credits.
Like, hey, you have a bachelor's degree.
Do you want a master's degree?
If you're willing to go to school outside of work,
we'll provide that for you.
And the reason is now you have people who work for you
that have master's degrees
and not bachelor degrees, right?
So this could be a similar thing.
thing like hey we want to provide a position for people to come work as the
dir or part of the dir and then maybe they come back and work for us afterwards
but they would be so much more knowledgeable about Python having spent
a year in this role right I mean there's a lot of benefits like this you it's it's
you know you won't believe this but like obviously the project is a million
lines of code, right? Like half of it is in C, half of it is in Python. So I don't know
about most of it, right? Like I've seen much of it, but like I probably don't have expertise
in most of it. But like nobody cares when they submit pull requests. So then I look
at them. So for many of them, it's my first actual stint at, you know, like touching a
part of Python that I might know as a user, you know, from the outside, right? Yes. But
But then looking at like, oh, how does dunder main actually work in Python is this special
module that, you know, like your execution starts with, like, how does this actually
work?
So you go and see and you actually kind of dig and you understand like, ah, okay, like,
I understand this because you have to take into account, you know, starting your Python
interpreter like, you know, with, I don't know, code from the standard input, or maybe
somebody is starting a REPL or maybe you're from a file or maybe it's a zip file or whatever.
So now I know more than I just knew like two weeks back about Dunder main. So very true.
Like you bring somebody in who is motivated and maybe knows a bit about what CPython already
is built on, but necessarily you're going to get experience in parts that you would
otherwise not touch, right? Because now you're reviewing the bulk of pull requests that are
not the ones that you would write yourself.
- Yep, absolutely.
I remember one listener sent me a message
and said, "I was really surprised to hear you say
"there's like this whole section of the standard library
"you didn't know about."
That describes a lot of,
there's a lot of stuff out there, right?
You might just barely touch it,
you might have no use for it.
There's a lot.
And this would force you to just get that depth.
- It's big, it's big.
- Absolutely.
So Rodrigo asked previously about what Drive-By contributors can do to help you.
What can, you know, this is speaking to a smaller audience, of course, but still, I think it's relevant.
What can the core developers and the steering council and the people on the inside do to help you be more successful and efficient?
Well, most of them know me.
So the most important thing for them, and I really mean it, is like, just tell me what I should be rather doing.
doing if you feel like there's something else I should be touching on or if I did
something that you don't like for any reason just write me just tell me right
like because like it's different from the external contributors most of the
core devs I know one way or another so we can be direct with one another and I
think like the make or break of this position is for me to provide value for
both groups so if there's anything that a particular person that needs or wants
or even feels like, "Hey, you're focusing too much on this thing," or, "Oh, have you looked at this?
This is not something you've touched yet, but this is extremely important. Just let me know."
So, communication is key for us right now. And another thing that I kind of still don't
quite know how to tackle is that I don't feel comfortable just now assigning a bunch of things
to volunteers. You know what I mean? It's like now there is a bunch of pull requests where
they're fixing something that actually broke because of a change that some core developer
did five years back. So of course they have the best context on this change but I feel kind of
icky just you know going and doing this 10 times a day you know because it really feels like now
you're being this manager of Python telling people hey go fix your shit like no that is not what I
mean? It's like, you know, as I said, the project is huge. And, you know, very often,
it is really a bunch of people like, like a low number of people who have the best context on a
given part of Python. So yeah, like, if I do this too much, like, you know, again, like, you know,
tell me if I'm not doing this, and instead of going ahead and doing changes, you know, that
that you don't like in your particular favorite
piece of Python, also let me know.
Like, this is still something I'm pretty new at.
Like, I'm just going to issue my second invoice
like next week, I'm pretty excited about that.
But you know, like, it's still a new thing for me.
So I guess, you know, for the core devs, yeah, let's talk.
Like, whenever something is, you know, clearly,
well, improvable, if that's a word, like, let me know.
- Yeah, absolutely.
How much input into this role did the steering council have
and how much did Guido have?
Or was this a PSF plus Google sort of thing?
- So I actually spoke with nobody from Google.
So directly, I don't know the people behind this position,
like on their side.
I know a bunch of core devs who happen to work at Google
and they're very supportive of the position.
So that's the extent of it.
The steering council meets with me every second week.
So it's mostly kind of me talking,
hey, this is what I spend my time on.
You know, they ask me like, hey, how can we,
well, improve your output or whatever,
or just they would just tell me about things
that they find interesting or important
that I might look at,
but it doesn't feel like they're really kind of going
and telling me what I should be doing,
like, you know, point blank, right?
like they're just having like suggestions on
and how this role should be moving.
So this is kind of, this is a short,
well, 20, 30 minute meeting every two weeks.
So kind of high level.
I do have one just like it with Eva from the PSF and E.
So it's really, you know, kind of the Python Foundation
internally also needs to communicate
because they have all the keys to say,
being able to restart a bot, right?
Or to, you know, kind of make changes on a given server
or maybe change some workflow on GitHub
that affects everybody and so on and so on.
So we just also meet every second week
to make sure everybody's on the same page.
And also just some very low level stuff,
like for example, figuring out like,
hey, what calendar am I working on?
Like is Labor Day a day off for me?
or is some other holiday that is here in Poland,
but not in the US, are they off for me?
Or don't I get any day off at all
and I work on Christmas day, I don't know.
So all of those things have to be actually discussed
with the PSF directly.
Yeah, and core devs, we do talk a lot.
And Guido in particular was very supportive
of me starting this role.
So I'm very grateful for this
because it's kind of like, you know,
kind of just getting a little bit of, you know,
like an email, just a bunch of sentences,
just actually kind of saying like,
"Hey, I believe this is a great decision.
You're gonna do great."
Like, okay, I don't know.
Like, I still feel like I'm a beginner in a lot of this.
It's really reassuring and kind of lifts your spirit.
So, yeah, like I guess we are in constant contact
using super old ways like email and, well,
discourse to an extent.
And now, like, VCs.
So yeah, like, we're doing Google Meets and Zooms
with others.
Actually, we have too many, well,
communication methods right now.
So like, me talking with core devs,
I'm on IRC right now so that others can actually reach me
as well.
Others would talk to me through WhatsApp and whatnot.
Like, I have like 10 chat message apps right now open
just to be able to talk to everybody I need to talk to.
So that needs fixing, but I don't know
who is supposed to do that.
- Yeah, I don't either.
It's a growing problem, not a shrinking one.
But it sounds like you're doing a good job.
Even Rodrigo out there in the live stream says,
"Listen to this, hypes me up to go and contribute to Python."
So hopefully that sentiment is multiplied
across all the people who are contributing work
that it'll get more attention sooner.
So well done.
- Absolutely, I'm happy to hear that.
- Yeah, absolutely.
All right, well, we're about out of time
to talk about the new role.
So let me ask you the two final questions,
which I've asked you before,
but it's been a while since you were on the show,
so time for an update.
If you're gonna do some Python,
you know, you always run across different external packages,
things on PyPI and whatnot.
Have you found one that you're just like,
"Wow, this thing is amazing.
"We should talk about it, get more awareness of it."
- So it's already growing,
So I'm not going to tell anything that is now extremely novel,
but I'm extremely digging rich,
like the text formatting library for CLIs.
Anything that we write would use their progress bars and
a bunch of other stuff that's there for column formatting and whatnot.
I find it very approachable and the results are like,
yeah, this is a console,
this is a text console just to be clear.
It just looks fantastic.
>> It's insane.
>> The code for it is very nice.
It's very declarative.
Rich, I like a lot.
Will, the author of it,
is now working on a text UI library that is much more
Pythonic than the previous propositions that we had,
say, like Curses or Uruid.
I'm hyped for that as well.
It's called Textual.
>> Yeah, Textual looks really interesting.
- Yeah, absolutely. - Exactly.
Yeah, those would be my easy propositions for the day
in terms of third-party packages.
Cool.
One that I actually thought of, Rich, earlier
when you talked about the better error messages,
there's a cool article called
"FastAPI Enriched Tracebacks in Development"
that talks about how to take Rich and then plug it in
so whenever there's a stack trace,
you get super colorized error messages
and all sorts of cool stuff.
And yeah, pretty neat.
Pretty neat there.
- This changes a lot actually,
because I find that, for example,
between using GCC, the C compiler,
and using Clang, just the fact that it colors my errors,
tiny thing, but it makes Clang just feel nicer to me
because it just values my time.
It just makes it easier for me to read
the relevant parts of the message.
This sort of thing might just feel like,
this is not really that important in my app,
but it might save you a lot of time later on when you're
actually debugging stack traces that
you're looking at like at 2 AM or whatnot.
I think this is extremely important,
not just because it's aesthetically pleasing,
which is important in itself,
but also functionally.
This is the reason we are using syntax highlighting,
because it actually lets you see
more information at the same time, right?
So absolutely, like Rich provides this in a very smart way,
like to your application,
so not just your Python stack traces,
but whatever you're displaying might be like this.
It will automatically format numbers,
it will automatically highlight dates and
file paths and whatnot and whatnot.
So tremendous value added.
>> Yeah, tables, all kinds of cool stuff.
Yeah, it's definitely getting a lot of love out there.
Then if you're going to write some Python code,
what editor are you supporting these days?
>> I am deeply invested in VS Code right now because it is in
a very peculiar position where it's actually very good for
CPython development and core development because it's
both a good C editor with
support for just jumping through definitions and whatnot,
and also has a great Python plugin, like PyLens.
So it's both a type checker and
this language server that does a lot of help for you specifically.
So it's just a good package all around,
like to just do CPython core development.
Is it my perfect editor?
Well, almost. If the Vim plugin for it was official,
officially maintained, and a little more sturdy,
I would be the happiest person there.
But well, clearly this is a super low key feature, like it's not a very popular thing.
Must not be because otherwise, you know, like looking at what Microsoft is now doing with GitHub and whatnot,
like that would have been implemented if more people asked for it.
So I might be of a dying breed of Vim users, I don't know.
Still, like gets the job done like with the current Vim plugin and system, like, you know, with Windows splits and whatnot.
I'm very happy with it.
And now seeing that my development environment can actually be run in a browser,
like, what else could you ask for? It's pretty amazing.
- Yeah, exactly. You're doing your podcast live stream,
recording from a browser, and you're editing in a browser, apparently.
All right, Lucas, well, it's been great to have you here.
Final call to action, you know, people want to learn more about the DIR,
maybe want to help you out or consider sponsoring this in the future or more people.
What do you say?
- Well, first of all, if you are a Python user,
you are very, very welcome to bring issues to us
when they happen.
So whether this is on bugspython.org,
obviously a very good place so that your report
will historically maintain there,
and we can have a discussion that is open
and actually work towards a solution.
But also in informal ways.
If you reach to us via RSC or ask stuff on the mailing list or discourse,
we're very happy to hear your feedback.
So you don't have to write code like on day one, don't worry.
You might never write code for us to fix your problems.
Just report them. It's great.
If you have stuff that works very well for you,
you might also spend a minute telling us
because this is something that nobody gets enough in this industry.
We only get bug reports, you know?
And yeah, like if you do want to contribute,
there's many ways to do this.
If you want to code, absolutely.
Just don't think it's super, super trivial
to get large changes into a 30 year old
programming language.
I could make an entire talk just about that.
- Right, every little change has huge implications
for some small percentage of people,
but there's millions.
- Sometimes very surprising ones, yes.
But yes, absolutely we need more people doing the work
and there's plenty of it.
So you might still have a tremendous impact for the world.
Maybe your code is going to run on Mars, you never know.
- Yeah, even if you're just reviewing PRs
and making the little tiny fixes or stuff like that,
that could be a big contribution.
- Totally, and finally for the current sponsors, thank you.
You make this possible, so like really, thank you.
and for people and companies
considering sponsorship for next year.
If there's anything that you're not seeing
that you would like to see
that would convince you that it's worth it,
also let the PSF know.
Like we might adjust what we're doing
so that you're more comfortable with sponsoring.
Because really, like, you know,
this is a very unique programming language
in the sense that it is community driven and community owned.
So yeah, please talk to us.
- Yeah, awesome.
Well, thanks so much for being here.
Catch you next time.
- Thank you, bye bye.
[BLANK_AUDIO]